# _RUST_

- Robert Marshall
- robert.marshall7@uoit.net

## About the language

Rust began as a personal project of Graydon Hoare, a Mozilla employee who began the project in 2006. Eventually mozilla began sponsoring the project in 2009, and the custom compiler rustc compiled itself for the first time in 2011. Since then there have been many updates and a large following formed creating many open source libraries or "crates" for rust. Rust is now used in many popular programs such as Firefox, Dropbox, and Cloudflare.

## About the syntax

Rusts syntax is similar to C and C++, 2 of the languages that inspired it. They share many keywords such as if, else, while, for, and many others. They also share many logic symbols such as & for and, | for or, and == for comparison, along with many others.

By looking through the code included, you should see similarities

## About the tools

To run Rust you must first install Rust and its associated programs. An installer is available for windows, and a terminal command is available for linux, bth of which can be found on Rust's website. https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install
This install method will setup Rust and its compiler completely.

To compile a single file rust program, the syntax would look as follows:
	rustc file.rs

For high optimization:
	rustc -O file.rs

For debugging information
	rustc -g file.rs

For more information about compiling rust, visit https://www.mankier.com/1/rustc

Cargo is used in Rust to create a project. Cargo is Rusts package manager. In command line enter the following:
	cargo new project_name --bin

This generates a folder by the name of the project, a main file, and a cargo.toml file where you can define your dependencies.
Once dependencies are added, navigate to the new folder in commandline. The documentation can be generated by running the following in command line:
	cargo build
		This downloads any dependencies listed and builds the program
	cargo doc --open
		This creates the documentation and opens it

To build and run the project use the command
	cargo run

## About the standard library

Rust has a large variety of data structures. 
Signed integers: i8, i16, i32, i64, i128 where the number is the number of bits
Unsigned integers use the same naming style except use u insted of i
Rust also offers the array, bool, char, float, string, slice, and pointer primitive types, along with many others

Rust also has many keywords.
"as" allows casting a value to a type
"const" defines a constant
for, if, and while are all supported aswell.

For a full list of Rusts standard library, visit https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/

## About open source library

Rust is commonly used for game development, and many new Rust developers make simple 2D games to start understanding the basics.
One popular open source Rust library (usually refered to as packages or crates) is piston, a simple game engine. It is capable of running a game loop, rendering fast 2D graphics, rendering 3D objects, and running AI behavior. A full list of piston features can be found here: https://github.com/PistonDevelopers/piston/wiki/Features

Piston is the external library used for the snake game in the real-app section of this project. 

# Analysis of the language

>The style of programming supported by the language: functional vs procedural programming

	Rust is a multi-paradigm language, meaning it has aspects of both funtional and procedural programming.

>The ability to perform meta-programming such as macros

	Rust is capable of meta programming. It has full suppor tof macros allowing users to use a short hand while coding. More information can be found here https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.30.0/book/first-edition/macros.html

>Symbol resolution and its support for closure

	Rusts closure support allows users to create anonymous functions and either save those functions to a variable, or pass them as an argument to other functions. The closure can be created at one part of the code and then can be called to evaluate in a different context later. Documentation on Rusts use of closures can be found here:  https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.19.0/book/second-edition/ch13-01-closures.html

>Scoping rules supported by the language: lexical vs dynamic scoping

	Rust runs in a lexical scope, meaning that all values have a owner where the scope of the value and owner are the same.

>Functional programming constructs either as part of the language or supported by the standard library of the runtime.

	Rust has a lot of options for functional programming. In the standard library rust has functional programming support of closures, iterators, and IO. More information can be found at https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.19.0/book/second-edition/ch13-00-functional-features.html

>Its type system: static vs dynamic types

	Rust uses a static type system, meaning that all of rusts variable types must be specified before compiling.

>Strengths and weaknesses of the language

	Strengths
		-Rust is fairly new and still getting many updates
		-Its similarity to C and C++ make it easy to transition to and from rust
		-There is a large community making many opensource tools making various projects much easier to complete

	Weaknesses
		-Being so new rust is still experiencing some bugs
		-Rust is very explicit, as opposed to other languages that may be more implicit. Users must be very clear in the instruction or their code may not work as intended
		-Rust code can get very lengthy in comparison to other languages such as python
